README.md, before:

﻿# Password-Manager-CLI

A memory-safe Rust CLI vault that generates, encrypts, and stores passwords locally.

This project demonstrates secure, offline password management using Rust's safety guarantees. It uses Argon2id for key derivation and AES-256-GCM for authenticated encryption.

Purpose & goals
---------------

This project is an educational, practical reference implementation of a local, encrypted password vault implemented in Rust. The goals are:

- Demonstrate how to derive encryption keys safely from a master password using Argon2id and store parameters needed for reproducible decryption.
- Show how to perform authenticated encryption with AES-256-GCM and store ciphertext in a small, versioned JSON envelope.
- Provide a simple, scriptable CLI for common password-manager flows (init, add, get, rm, list, generate).
- Illustrate safe I/O patterns (atomic writes, backups) and memory-hygiene practices (zeroizing derived keys) suitable for a small production or educational project.

This repository is not intended to be a fully-featured production password manager (no sync, limited platform clipboard hygiene, limited zeroization). Treat it as a building block and learning artifact.

Project structure (current)
--------------------------

High-level file layout (important files):

- `Cargo.toml` — dependency manifest and optional feature flags (e.g., `clipboard`).
- `src/main.rs` — CLI parsing and top-level wiring (subcommands, global flags like `--file`, `--no-backup`, `--no-clipboard`).
- `src/models.rs` — serde data models for vault envelope and entries.
- `src/crypto.rs` — KDF (Argon2) and AES-GCM encrypt/decrypt helpers.
- `src/storage.rs` — disk I/O helpers for reading/writing the JSON envelope, atomic writes and backups.
- `src/vault.rs` — high-level vault operations implementing `init`, `add`, `get`, `rm`, `list`, and `gen` commands.
- `README.md` / `SPEC.md` — documentation and spec for the vault format and CLI behavior.

Repository layout (on-disk)
---------------------------

A quick tree of important files and folders in this repository (top-level):

```
Password-Manager-CLI/
├── Cargo.toml                # Rust manifest (dependencies & features)
├── README.md                 # Project documentation (this file)
├── SPEC.md                   # Vault format and CLI spec
├── LICENSE                   # Project license (MIT)
├── src/
│   ├── main.rs               # CLI wiring and entrypoint
│   ├── vault.rs              # High-level vault operations and command handlers
│   ├── crypto.rs             # KDF (Argon2) + AEAD (AES-GCM) helpers
│   ├── storage.rs            # Read/write envelope, atomic write helpers
│   └── models.rs             # serde data models for entries and envelope
├── .github/                  # (optional) CI workflows (not present yet)
└── tests/                    # (optional) integration tests (not present yet)
```

Feel free to add example configs, workflows, or an `examples/` folder for sample vault files.

How it works (execution flow)
----------------------------

Typical operation flow (e.g., `get`):

1. CLI parses arguments and locates the vault file (default OS path or `--file`).
2. The code reads the JSON envelope and extracts KDF parameters and salt.
3. The user is prompted for the master password (hidden). The code derives a 256-bit key using Argon2id and the stored salt/params.
4. The key is used with AES-256-GCM and the stored nonce to decrypt the ciphertext into a JSON payload.
5. The decrypted payload (a JSON array of entries) is parsed and the requested entry is printed or copied to the clipboard (if enabled).

On `add` or `rm`, the code performs the reverse: decrypts the payload, modifies the entries, re-encrypts the new payload with a fresh nonce, and performs an atomic write to replace the vault file (with a best-effort `.bak` copy of the previous file).

Why this project exists (motivation)
-----------------------------------

There are many mature password managers; this project exists to:

- Teach and document the core primitives of a secure, offline vault in a compact codebase.
- Demonstrate safe Rust patterns for handling secrets, I/O, and error handling with clear ownership.
- Provide a scaffold for further experimentation (rekeying, sync adapters, hardware-backed keys) without starting from scratch.

Dependency & design rationale
-----------------------------

Why these specific crates and choices were made (concise rationale):

- `clap` (derive): industry-standard CLI parsing; expressive, well-tested and ergonomic for subcommands and flags.
- `argon2`: provides Argon2id KDF; Argon2id is a modern, recommended KDF for password-based key derivation and is resistant to GPU/ASIC optimizations when configured correctly.
- `aes-gcm`: provides a safe AEAD implementation (AES-256-GCM) for authenticated encryption — chosen because AEAD avoids silent tampering and provides both confidentiality and integrity.
- `serde` / `serde_json`: easy, interoperable JSON serialization and parsing for the envelope; keeps the on-disk format readable and versionable.
- `zeroize`: provides the `Zeroizing` wrapper to reduce the lifetime of sensitive key material in memory and zero it on drop.
- `rpassword`: small, cross-platform prompt for hidden master-password input.
- `rand`: secure randomness for salts, nonces, and password generation.
- `base64`: compact encoding of binary fields for a JSON envelope.
- `anyhow`: ergonomic error handling with context to produce helpful error messages during development and in logs.
- `clipboard` (optional feature): convenience for copying passwords to the system clipboard; optional because some platforms and CI environments do not support it.

Design trade-offs and notes:

- JSON envelope (human-readable) was chosen for simplicity and inspectability; a binary format could be more compact but harder to debug during development.
- Argon2 params are stored in the envelope to allow reproducible decryption and to enable a future `rekey` migration path.
- AES-GCM requires a unique nonce for each encryption; the code uses a random nonce per write and stores it in the envelope.

Improvements, follow-ups & roadmap
----------------------------------

Short-term/practical improvements (low-risk):

- Add unit and integration tests covering encrypt/decrypt round-trips, `init` -> `add` -> `get` -> `rm` flows, and error cases.
- Add a GitHub Actions workflow to run `cargo fmt -- --check`, `cargo clippy`, and `cargo test` on every PR.
- Systematically wrap decrypted payloads and other transient secret buffers with `Zeroizing` to reduce secret lifetime in memory.

Mid-term/security improvements:

- Implement a `rekey` command that allows migrating KDF parameters and rotating the master password without losing entries.
- Implement platform-specific secure clipboard clearing: use native APIs where available to better scrub clipboard contents and avoid leaving secrets in memory.
- Support hardware-backed keys (YubiKey or TPM) as an optional unlock mechanism.

Long-term/advanced features:

- Add an optional authenticated sync adapter (git-backed or server) and conflict resolution for multi-device usage.
- Add a plugin system or extension API so different storage backends or KDFs can be experimented with safely.
- Formal audits and hardened release builds targeting secure deployment scenarios.

Quick start
-----------

Build (release):

```powershell
cargo build --release
```

Run help (development):

```powershell
cargo run -- --help
```

If you want clipboard support, build with the optional feature:

```powershell
cargo run --features clipboard -- get -n NAME --copy --timeout 10
```

Status (current)
----------------
- Core CLI and command wiring implemented: `init`, `add`, `get`, `rm`, `list`, `gen`.
- Encryption & KDF integrated: Argon2id-derived key and AES-256-GCM encrypt/decrypt implemented.
- Vault envelope format implemented and read/write implemented.
- Atomic write is used (`tmp` + `rename`) and a best-effort `.bak` copy is created when overwriting the vault.

What works now
--------------
- `vault init [--file PATH] [--force]` — initialize vault and set master password. Requires `--force` to overwrite existing vault.
- `vault add -n NAME` — add an entry (prompts for username, URL, notes, password; auto-generate if empty).
- `vault get -n NAME [--copy] [--timeout N]` — retrieve an entry; prints password or copies to clipboard (if built with `clipboard` feature). `--timeout` is intended to clear the clipboard after N seconds (best-effort).
- `vault rm -n NAME` — remove an entry.
- `vault list` — list entry names.
- `vault gen --length N [--symbols]` — generate a password locally.

Default vault path
------------------
- Windows: `%APPDATA%/vault.json.enc`
- Unix: `$HOME/.vault.json.enc`
- Override with `--file PATH` on the CLI.

Storage envelope (required fields)
---------------------------------
The vault file is a JSON envelope. The current code expects all of the following fields to be present. Missing or malformed fields will cause decryption to fail with a descriptive error.

Top-level fields (all required):

- `version` (string): vault format version, for example `"1.0"`. Used for future format migrations.
- `kdf` (object): KDF descriptor object. The code currently understands the following shape:
  - `type` (string): currently must be the literal string `"argon2id"`.
  - `params` (object): Argon2 parameter object (all integers):
    - `mem_kib` (integer): memory cost in KiB (e.g. `65536` for 64 MiB).
    - `iterations` (integer): number of iterations (e.g. `3`).
    - `parallelism` (integer): parallelism degree (e.g. `1`).
  - `salt` (string): base64-encoded salt used by Argon2 (must be present and valid base64).
- `nonce` (string): base64-encoded AES-GCM nonce used to encrypt the ciphertext (must decode to the expected nonce length for AES-GCM).
- `ciphertext` (string): base64-encoded AES-GCM ciphertext. When decrypted with the derived key and nonce this yields the JSON payload described below.

Notes:
- The `kdf` object is read and used to derive the encryption key; its `salt` and `params` must match what was used at `init` time.
- The code does not attempt to be clever about missing fields: if any required field is absent or invalid the operation will fail with an explanatory error. This keeps the runtime checks explicit and auditable.

Entry JSON structure (decrypted)
--------------------------------
When decrypted, the vault contains a JSON array of entries. The code reads and writes entries using serde, so the JSON payload must be a top-level array. Each array element (entry) must have the following fields:

- `name` (string) — unique identifier for the entry (used with `get`, `rm`). It is expected to be unique within the vault; duplicate names may lead to surprising behavior.
- `username` (string|null) — optional username. Use JSON `null` for absent values.
- `url` (string|null) — optional URL for the site/service.
- `notes` (string|null) — optional notes.
- `password` (string) — the password stored for this entry.

Implementation note: entries are serialized/deserialized using serde; types and missing fields should match the struct definitions in `src/models.rs`.

Security & limitations (current)
--------------------------------

The project aims to demonstrate secure vault primitives and a usable CLI. That said, this is an early-stage implementation and has known limitations you should be aware of before trusting it with real secrets.

What is implemented (positive guarantees):

- Argon2id key derivation: Argon2id (via the `argon2` crate) is used to derive a 256-bit key from the master password and a per-vault salt. The used Argon2 parameters are stored in the `kdf.params` object in the envelope so that decryption can re-derive the key.
- AES-256-GCM authenticated encryption: all secrets are encrypted using AES-GCM (via the `aes-gcm` crate) and a random nonce. The `nonce` and the ciphertext are stored in the envelope.
- Atomic writes: writes are performed by writing a temporary file and renaming it into place. This provides atomic replacement on most filesystems.
- Backups: when overwriting an existing vault file the code attempts to create a `.bak` copy of the previous file (best-effort).
- Memory hygiene: derived keys are wrapped in `Zeroizing` to reduce their lifetime in memory; master password strings are dropped promptly after use.

Known limitations and caveats (please read carefully):

- Partial zeroization: while the derived key is zeroized on drop, not every transient plaintext buffer is currently wrapped with `Zeroizing` in every code path. Some decrypted bytes and intermediate Strings may remain in memory until the OS reclaims them. We plan to strengthen zeroization in a follow-up.
- Clipboard behavior is best-effort: clipboard support is optional and only available when you build with the `clipboard` cargo feature. The `--timeout` option spawns a background thread that attempts to clear the clipboard after the requested seconds; this is best-effort and platform-dependent. For security-critical uses do not rely solely on this mechanism.
- Backup policy is configurable at runtime: you can opt out of creating `.bak` files using the `--no-backup` flag on the CLI. (This flag is implemented.)
- Cross-filesystem atomicity: the current atomic write uses `rename` which is atomic on the same filesystem but may fail or fall back to non-atomic behavior across mounted filesystems. The code attempts parent directory creation but does not handle every cross-filesystem edge case.
- No rekey/migration utility: there is no `rekey` command yet. If you change KDF parameters in code or want to rotate your master password you'll need to implement a migration path or wait for the planned `rekey` command.
- No remote or multi-device sync: this project is strictly local and does not attempt to sync vault files across machines.
- Limited testing: unit and integration tests are not included yet. Before using this in production add tests covering serialization, encrypt/decrypt round-trips, and end-to-end CLI flows.

Security recommendation: Treat this project as an educational prototype. If you plan to use it for real secrets, audit the code, add comprehensive tests, and consider platform-specific secure-erase strategies for cleared clipboard contents and memory.

Usage examples
--------------

Initialize a vault (won't overwrite unless `--force`):

```powershell
cargo run -- init --file C:\path\to\vault.json.enc
```

Force initialize and overwrite existing vault:

```powershell
cargo run -- init --force
```

Add an entry:

```powershell
cargo run -- add -n mysite
```

Get an entry and copy to clipboard (requires building with clipboard feature):

```powershell
cargo run --features clipboard -- get -n mysite --copy --timeout 10
```

List entries:

```powershell
cargo run -- list
```

Remove an entry:

```powershell
cargo run -- rm -n mysite
```

Try it (quick commands)
-----------------------

These commands are quick, copy-paste friendly ways to exercise the main flows locally. They run the dev binary via `cargo run` so you can inspect behaviour and logs. Adjust `--file` to avoid clobbering any existing vault.

```powershell
# Initialize a new vault at a temporary path (prompts for master password)
cargo run -- init --file C:\temp\vault.test.json.enc

# Add an entry interactively (prompts; leave password blank to auto-generate)
cargo run -- add -n testsite --file C:\temp\vault.test.json.enc

# List entries
cargo run -- list --file C:\temp\vault.test.json.enc

# Get an entry and print password (no clipboard)
cargo run -- get -n testsite --file C:\temp\vault.test.json.enc

# Remove the test entry
cargo run -- rm -n testsite --file C:\temp\vault.test.json.enc

# Clean up: remove the test vault file
Remove-Item C:\temp\vault.test.json.enc -ErrorAction SilentlyContinue
```

Developer notes & next steps
---------------------------
- Add tests (unit + integration) covering: serialization, encrypt/decrypt round-trip, init->add->get->rm flow.
- Add `rekey` to migrate KDF params and re-encrypt with a new key.
- Harden zeroization: wrap decrypted plaintext buffers in `Zeroizing` and scrub temporary variables.
- Add optional `--no-backup` and make backup behavior configurable.
- Improve clipboard clearing (OS-specific implementations behind feature flags).
- Add GitHub Actions for `cargo fmt -- --check`, `cargo clippy`, and `cargo test`.

Contributing
------------
PRs are welcome. If you submit security-sensitive changes (crypto/KDF/IO), please include rationale and tests. Avoid printing secrets in logs or CI.

Contact / License
-----------------
See repository metadata. This project is intended for educational/demonstration use; treat generated vaults carefully and audit before using in production.

Thank you — next I can add tests, tighten zeroization, or implement `rekey` on request.

Commit message:

Cleaned up the docs and streamlined the CLI. README now clearly outlines the project’s scope, structure, and security practices. Removed SPEC.md since it was just repeating info. Dropped clipboard support from the CLI and updated examples accordingly. Refactored code and tests to match. Also added a CI workflow for automated testing and linting, and polished the contributing guide to make onboarding smoother.

README.md, after:

﻿# Password-Manager-CLI

A memory-safe Rust CLI vault that generates, encrypts, and stores passwords locally.

This project demonstrates secure, offline password management using Rust's safety guarantees. It uses Argon2id for key derivation and AES-256-GCM for authenticated encryption.

Purpose & goals
---------------

This project is an educational, practical reference implementation of a local, encrypted password vault implemented in Rust. The goals are:

- Demonstrate how to derive encryption keys safely from a master password using Argon2id and store parameters needed for reproducible decryption.
- Show how to perform authenticated encryption with AES-256-GCM and store ciphertext in a small, versioned JSON envelope.
- Provide a simple, scriptable CLI for common password-manager flows (init, add, get, rm, list, generate).
- Illustrate safe I/O patterns (atomic writes, backups) and memory-hygiene practices (zeroizing derived keys) suitable for a small production or educational project.

This repository is not intended to be a fully-featured production password manager (no sync, no clipboard integration, limited zeroization). Treat it as a building block and learning artifact.

Project structure (current)
--------------------------

High-level file layout (important files):

- `Cargo.toml` — dependency manifest and dependencies.
- `src/main.rs` — CLI parsing and top-level wiring (subcommands, global flags like `--file`, `--no-backup`).
- `src/models.rs` — serde data models for vault envelope and entries.
- `src/crypto.rs` — KDF (Argon2) and AES-GCM encrypt/decrypt helpers.
- `src/storage.rs` — disk I/O helpers for reading/writing the JSON envelope, atomic writes and backups.
- `src/vault.rs` — high-level vault operations implementing `init`, `add`, `get`, `rm`, `list`, and `gen` commands.
- `README.md` / `SPEC.md` — documentation and spec for the vault format and CLI behavior.

Repository layout (on-disk)
---------------------------

A quick tree of important files and folders in this repository (top-level):

```
Password-Manager-CLI/
├── Cargo.toml                # Rust manifest (dependencies & features)
├── README.md                 # Project documentation (this file)
├── SPEC.md                   # Vault format and CLI spec
├── LICENSE                   # Project license (MIT)
├── src/
│   ├── main.rs               # CLI wiring and entrypoint
│   ├── vault.rs              # High-level vault operations and command handlers
│   ├── crypto.rs             # KDF (Argon2) + AEAD (AES-GCM) helpers
│   ├── storage.rs            # Read/write envelope, atomic write helpers
│   └── models.rs             # serde data models for entries and envelope
├── .github/                  # (optional) CI workflows (not present yet)
└── tests/                    # (optional) integration tests (not present yet)
```

Feel free to add example configs, workflows, or an `examples/` folder for sample vault files.

How it works (execution flow)
----------------------------

Typical operation flow (e.g., `get`):

1. CLI parses arguments and locates the vault file (default OS path or `--file`).
2. The code reads the JSON envelope and extracts KDF parameters and salt.
3. The user is prompted for the master password (hidden). The code derives a 256-bit key using Argon2id and the stored salt/params.
4. The key is used with AES-256-GCM and the stored nonce to decrypt the ciphertext into a JSON payload.
5. The decrypted payload (a JSON array of entries) is parsed and the requested entry is printed to stdout.

On `add` or `rm`, the code performs the reverse: decrypts the payload, modifies the entries, re-encrypts the new payload with a fresh nonce, and performs an atomic write to replace the vault file (with a best-effort `.bak` copy of the previous file).

Why this project exists (motivation)
-----------------------------------

There are many mature password managers; this project exists to:

- Teach and document the core primitives of a secure, offline vault in a compact codebase.
- Demonstrate safe Rust patterns for handling secrets, I/O, and error handling with clear ownership.
- Provide a scaffold for further experimentation (rekeying, sync adapters, hardware-backed keys) without starting from scratch.

Dependency & design rationale
-----------------------------

Why these specific crates and choices were made (concise rationale):

- `clap` (derive): industry-standard CLI parsing; expressive, well-tested and ergonomic for subcommands and flags.
- `argon2`: provides Argon2id KDF; Argon2id is a modern, recommended KDF for password-based key derivation and is resistant to GPU/ASIC optimizations when configured correctly.
- `aes-gcm`: provides a safe AEAD implementation (AES-256-GCM) for authenticated encryption — chosen because AEAD avoids silent tampering and provides both confidentiality and integrity.
- `serde` / `serde_json`: easy, interoperable JSON serialization and parsing for the envelope; keeps the on-disk format readable and versionable.
- `zeroize`: provides the `Zeroizing` wrapper to reduce the lifetime of sensitive key material in memory and zero it on drop.
- `rpassword`: small, cross-platform prompt for hidden master-password input.
- `rand`: secure randomness for salts, nonces, and password generation.
- `base64`: compact encoding of binary fields for a JSON envelope.
- `anyhow`: ergonomic error handling with context to produce helpful error messages during development and in logs.


Design trade-offs and notes:

- JSON envelope (human-readable) was chosen for simplicity and inspectability; a binary format could be more compact but harder to debug during development.
- Argon2 params are stored in the envelope to allow reproducible decryption and to enable a future `rekey` migration path.
- AES-GCM requires a unique nonce for each encryption; the code uses a random nonce per write and stores it in the envelope.

Improvements, follow-ups & roadmap
----------------------------------

Short-term/practical improvements (low-risk):

- Add unit and integration tests covering encrypt/decrypt round-trips, `init` -> `add` -> `get` -> `rm` flows, and error cases.
- Add a GitHub Actions workflow to run `cargo fmt -- --check`, `cargo clippy`, and `cargo test` on every PR.
- Systematically wrap decrypted payloads and other transient secret buffers with `Zeroizing` to reduce secret lifetime in memory.

Mid-term/security improvements:

- Implement a `rekey` command that allows migrating KDF parameters and rotating the master password without losing entries.

- Support hardware-backed keys (YubiKey or TPM) as an optional unlock mechanism.

Long-term/advanced features:

- Add an optional authenticated sync adapter (git-backed or server) and conflict resolution for multi-device usage.
- Add a plugin system or extension API so different storage backends or KDFs can be experimented with safely.
- Formal audits and hardened release builds targeting secure deployment scenarios.

Quick start
-----------

Build (release):

```powershell
cargo build --release
```

Run help (development):

```powershell
cargo run -- --help
```



Status (current)
----------------
- Core CLI and command wiring implemented: `init`, `add`, `get`, `rm`, `list`, `gen`.
- Encryption & KDF integrated: Argon2id-derived key and AES-256-GCM encrypt/decrypt implemented.
- Vault envelope format implemented and read/write implemented.
- Atomic write is used (`tmp` + `rename`) and a best-effort `.bak` copy is created when overwriting the vault.

What works now
--------------
- `vault init [--file PATH] [--force]` — initialize vault and set master password. Requires `--force` to overwrite existing vault.
- `vault add -n NAME` — add an entry (prompts for username, URL, notes, password; auto-generate if empty).
- `vault get -n NAME` — retrieve an entry and print password to stdout.
- `vault rm -n NAME` — remove an entry.
- `vault list` — list entry names.
- `vault gen --length N [--symbols]` — generate a password locally.

Default vault path
------------------
- Windows: `%APPDATA%/vault.json.enc`
- Unix: `$HOME/.vault.json.enc`
- Override with `--file PATH` on the CLI.

Storage envelope (required fields)
---------------------------------
The vault file is a JSON envelope. The current code expects all of the following fields to be present. Missing or malformed fields will cause decryption to fail with a descriptive error.

Top-level fields (all required):

- `version` (string): vault format version, for example `"1.0"`. Used for future format migrations.
- `kdf` (object): KDF descriptor object. The code currently understands the following shape:
  - `type` (string): currently must be the literal string `"argon2id"`.
  - `params` (object): Argon2 parameter object (all integers):
    - `mem_kib` (integer): memory cost in KiB (e.g. `65536` for 64 MiB).
    - `iterations` (integer): number of iterations (e.g. `3`).
    - `parallelism` (integer): parallelism degree (e.g. `1`).
  - `salt` (string): base64-encoded salt used by Argon2 (must be present and valid base64).
- `nonce` (string): base64-encoded AES-GCM nonce used to encrypt the ciphertext (must decode to the expected nonce length for AES-GCM).
- `ciphertext` (string): base64-encoded AES-GCM ciphertext. When decrypted with the derived key and nonce this yields the JSON payload described below.

Notes:
- The `kdf` object is read and used to derive the encryption key; its `salt` and `params` must match what was used at `init` time.
- The code does not attempt to be clever about missing fields: if any required field is absent or invalid the operation will fail with an explanatory error. This keeps the runtime checks explicit and auditable.

Entry JSON structure (decrypted)
--------------------------------
When decrypted, the vault contains a JSON array of entries. The code reads and writes entries using serde, so the JSON payload must be a top-level array. Each array element (entry) must have the following fields:

- `name` (string) — unique identifier for the entry (used with `get`, `rm`). It is expected to be unique within the vault; duplicate names may lead to surprising behavior.
- `username` (string|null) — optional username. Use JSON `null` for absent values.
- `url` (string|null) — optional URL for the site/service.
- `notes` (string|null) — optional notes.
- `password` (string) — the password stored for this entry.

Implementation note: entries are serialized/deserialized using serde; types and missing fields should match the struct definitions in `src/models.rs`.

Security & limitations (current)
--------------------------------

The project aims to demonstrate secure vault primitives and a usable CLI. That said, this is an early-stage implementation and has known limitations you should be aware of before trusting it with real secrets.

What is implemented (positive guarantees):

- Argon2id key derivation: Argon2id (via the `argon2` crate) is used to derive a 256-bit key from the master password and a per-vault salt. The used Argon2 parameters are stored in the `kdf.params` object in the envelope so that decryption can re-derive the key.
- AES-256-GCM authenticated encryption: all secrets are encrypted using AES-GCM (via the `aes-gcm` crate) and a random nonce. The `nonce` and the ciphertext are stored in the envelope.
- Atomic writes: writes are performed by writing a temporary file and renaming it into place. This provides atomic replacement on most filesystems.
- Backups: when overwriting an existing vault file the code attempts to create a `.bak` copy of the previous file (best-effort).
- Memory hygiene: derived keys are wrapped in `Zeroizing` to reduce their lifetime in memory; master password strings are dropped promptly after use.

Known limitations and caveats (please read carefully):

- Partial zeroization: while the derived key is zeroized on drop, not every transient plaintext buffer is currently wrapped with `Zeroizing` in every code path. Some decrypted bytes and intermediate Strings may remain in memory until the OS reclaims them. We plan to strengthen zeroization in a follow-up.

- Backup policy is configurable at runtime: you can opt out of creating `.bak` files using the `--no-backup` flag on the CLI. (This flag is implemented.)
- Cross-filesystem atomicity: the current atomic write uses `rename` which is atomic on the same filesystem but may fail or fall back to non-atomic behavior across mounted filesystems. The code attempts parent directory creation but does not handle every cross-filesystem edge case.
- No rekey/migration utility: there is no `rekey` command yet. If you change KDF parameters in code or want to rotate your master password you'll need to implement a migration path or wait for the planned `rekey` command.
- No remote or multi-device sync: this project is strictly local and does not attempt to sync vault files across machines.
- Limited testing: unit and integration tests are not included yet. Before using this in production add tests covering serialization, encrypt/decrypt round-trips, and end-to-end CLI flows.

Security recommendation: Treat this project as an educational prototype. If you plan to use it for real secrets, audit the code, add comprehensive tests, and consider platform-specific secure-erase strategies for memory handling.

Usage examples
--------------

Initialize a vault (won't overwrite unless `--force`):

```powershell
cargo run -- init --file C:\path\to\vault.json.enc
```

Force initialize and overwrite existing vault:

```powershell
cargo run -- init --force
```

Add an entry:

```powershell
cargo run -- add -n mysite
```

Get an entry and print password:

```powershell
cargo run -- get -n mysite
```

List entries:

```powershell
cargo run -- list
```

Remove an entry:

```powershell
cargo run -- rm -n mysite
```

Try it (quick commands)
-----------------------

These commands are quick, copy-paste friendly ways to exercise the main flows locally. They run the dev binary via `cargo run` so you can inspect behaviour and logs. Adjust `--file` to avoid clobbering any existing vault.

```powershell
# Initialize a new vault at a temporary path (prompts for master password)
cargo run -- init --file C:\temp\vault.test.json.enc

# Add an entry interactively (prompts; leave password blank to auto-generate)
cargo run -- add -n testsite --file C:\temp\vault.test.json.enc

# List entries
cargo run -- list --file C:\temp\vault.test.json.enc

# Get an entry and print password
cargo run -- get -n testsite --file C:\temp\vault.test.json.enc

# Remove the test entry
cargo run -- rm -n testsite --file C:\temp\vault.test.json.enc

# Clean up: remove the test vault file
Remove-Item C:\temp\vault.test.json.enc -ErrorAction SilentlyContinue
```

Developer notes & next steps
---------------------------
- Add tests (unit + integration) covering: serialization, encrypt/decrypt round-trip, init->add->get->rm flow.
- Add `rekey` to migrate KDF params and re-encrypt with a new key.
- Harden zeroization: wrap decrypted plaintext buffers in `Zeroizing` and scrub temporary variables.
- Add optional `--no-backup` and make backup behavior configurable.

- Add GitHub Actions for `cargo fmt -- --check`, `cargo clippy`, and `cargo test`.

Contributing
------------
PRs are welcome. If you submit security-sensitive changes (crypto/KDF/IO), please include rationale and tests. Avoid printing secrets in logs or CI.

Contact / License
-----------------
See repository metadata. This project is intended for educational/demonstration use; treat generated vaults carefully and audit before using in production.

Thank you — next I can add tests, tighten zeroization, or implement `rekey` on request.
